## Catalogue 目录
*   [HTTP Frames](#HTTP_Frames)

https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7540

http://http2.github.io/http2-spec/compression.html#rfc.section.A

CR  \r  13  0x0d  --> Carriage Return
LF  \n  10  0x0a  --> Line-Feed in Linux
CRLF    --> Line-Break in Linx/Win

HTTP Header is k-v data, and use CRLF. Be careful about CRLF injection 

## When Will The Server May Disconnect the Client?

   
   
### HTTP/2 Version Identification
The string `h2` identifies the protocol where HTTP/2 uses
*   Transport Layer Security (TLS).  This identifier is used
      in the TLS application-layer protocol negotiation (ALPN) extension
      field and in any place where HTTP/2 over TLS is identified.  
      The "h2" string is serialized into an ALPN protocol identifier as
      the two-octet sequence: `0x68, 0x32`.

*   The string "h2c" identifies the protocol where HTTP/2 is run over
      cleartext TCP.  This identifier is used in the HTTP/1.1 Upgrade
      header field and in any place where HTTP/2 over TCP is identified.
      The "h2c" string is reserved from the ALPN identifier space but
      describes a protocol that does not use TLS.

### Not Sure Whether the Server Support for HTTP/2
A client that makes a request for an "http" URI without prior knowledge about support for HTTP/2 on the next hop uses the HTTP Upgrade mechanism(Section 6.7 of [RFC7230]). 
   
The client does so by making an HTTP/1.1 request that includes an Upgrade header field with the "h2c" token.  Such an HTTP/1.1 request MUST include exactly one HTTP2-Settings (Section 3.2.1) header field.

For example:
```
GET / HTTP/1.1
Host: yiye.cc
Connection: Upgrade, HTTP2-Settings
Upgrade: h2c                            <---  HTTP/2 without TLS
HTTP2-Settings: <base64url encoding of HTTP/2 SETTINGS payload>
```
Requests that contain a payload body MUST be sent in their entirety before the client can send HTTP/2 frames.  This means that a large request can block the use of the connection until it is completely sent.

If concurrency of an initial request with subsequent requests is important, an OPTIONS request can be used to perform the upgrade to HTTP/2, at the cost of an additional round trip.

A server that does not support HTTP/2 can respond to the request as though the Upgrade header field were absent:
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 243
Content-Type: text/html
...
```

A server that supports HTTP/2 accepts the upgrade with a 101 (Switching Protocols) response.  After the empty line that terminates the 101 response, the server can begin sending HTTP/2 frames.  These frames MUST include a response to the request that initiated the upgrade.
 
E.g.
```
HTTP/1.1 101 Switching Protocols
Connection: Upgrade
Upgrade: h2c

[ HTTP/2 connection ...
```
The first HTTP/2 frame sent by the server MUST be a server connection preface ("PRI * HTTP/2.0\r\n\r\nSM\r\n\r\n") consisting of a SETTINGS frame. Upon receiving the 101 response, the client MUST send a connection preface, which includes a SETTINGS frame.

The HTTP/1.1 request that is sent prior to upgrade is assigned a stream identifier of 1 with default priority values.  Stream 1 is implicitly "half-closed" from the client toward the server, since the request is completed as an HTTP/1.1 request.  After commencing the HTTP/2 connection, stream 1 is used for the response.

### HTTP2-Settings Header Field
A request that upgrades from HTTP/1.1 to HTTP/2 MUST include exactly
   one "HTTP2-Settings" header field.  The HTTP2-Settings header field
   is a connection-specific header field that includes parameters that
   govern the HTTP/2 connection, provided in anticipation of the server
   accepting the request to upgrade.
```
HTTP2-Settings    = token68
```
 A server MUST NOT upgrade the connection to HTTP/2 if this header
   field is not present or if more than one is present.  A server MUST
   NOT send this header field.  The content of the HTTP2-Settings header field is the payload of a
   SETTINGS frame, encoded as a base64url string (that is,
   the URL- and filename-safe Base64 encoding described in Section 5 of
   [RFC4648], with any trailing '=' characters omitted). The ABNF
   [RFC5234] production for "token68" is defined in Section 2.1 of
   [RFC7235].
   
 Since the upgrade is only intended to apply to the immediate
   connection, a client sending the HTTP2-Settings header field MUST
   also send "HTTP2-Settings" as a connection option in the Connection
   header field to prevent it from being forwarded.

  A server decodes and interprets these values as it would any other
   SETTINGS frame.  Explicit acknowledgement of these settings is not necessary, since a 101 response serves as
   implicit acknowledgement.  Providing these values in the upgrade
   request gives a client an opportunity to provide parameters prior to
   receiving any frames from the server.

###  HTTP/2 Connection Preface
 In HTTP/2, each endpoint is required to send a connection preface as
   a final confirmation of the protocol in use and to establish the
   initial settings for the HTTP/2 connection.  The client and server
   each send a different connection preface.

   The client connection preface starts with a sequence of 24 octets, which in hex notation is:
```
0x505249202a20485454502f322e300d0a0d0a534d0d0a0d0a            <--  PRI * HTTP/2.0\r\n\r\nSM\r\n\r\n
```

This sequence MUST be followed by a
   SETTINGS frame, which MAY be empty.  The client sends
   the client connection preface immediately upon receipt of a 101
   (Switching Protocols) response (indicating a successful upgrade) or
   as the first application data octets of a TLS connection.  If
   starting an HTTP/2 connection with prior knowledge of server support
   for the protocol, the client connection preface is sent upon
   connection establishment.
   
      The server connection preface consists of a potentially empty
   SETTINGS frame that MUST be the first frame the server
   sends in the HTTP/2 connection.
   
   
   The SETTINGS frames received from a peer as part of the connection
   preface MUST be acknowledged after sending the
   connection preface.
   
   
   To avoid unnecessary latency, clients are permitted to send
   additional frames to the server immediately after sending the client
   connection preface, without waiting to receive the server connection
   preface.
   
   Upon receiving the SETTINGS frame, the client is expected to
   honor any parameters established.  In some configurations, it is
   possible for the server to transmit SETTINGS before the client sends
   additional frames, providing an opportunity to avoid this issue.

   Clients and servers MUST treat an invalid connection preface as a
   connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.  A GOAWAY
   frame MAY be omitted in this case, since an invalid
   preface indicates that the peer is not using HTTP/2.
   
# HTTP Frames   <a id="HTTP_Frames"></a>
All frames begin with a fixed 9-octet （72-bits) header followed by a variable-length payload.
```
+-----------------------------------------------+
|                 Length (24)                   |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|   Type (8)    |   Flags (8)   |
+-+-------------+---------------+-------------------------------+
|R|                 Stream Identifier (31)                      |  
+=+=============================================================+
|                   Frame Payload (0...)                      ...
+---------------------------------------------------------------+
```

* Length:  The length of the frame payload expressed as an unsigned 24-bit integer.  Values greater than 2^14 (16,384) MUST NOT be sent unless the receiver has set a larger value for SETTINGS_MAX_FRAME_SIZE.
* Type:  The 8-bit type of the frame.  The frame type determines the format and semantics of the frame.  Implementations MUST ignore and discard any frame that has a type that is unknown. 
    - 0x00  DATA, the data in Body in HTTP/1.x
    - 0x04  SETTINGS

* Flags:  An 8-bit field reserved for boolean flags specific to the frame type. Flags are assigned semantics specific to the indicated frame type. Flags that have no defined semantics for a particular frame type MUST be ignored and MUST be left unset (0x0) when sending. E.g. to send the last Type = 0 (DATA) Frame, the last bit of the Flags should be set to 1 (ENG_STREAM, flags &= 0x01)
* R: A reserved 1-bit field.  The semantics of this bit are undefined, and the bit MUST remain unset (0x0) when sending and MUST be ignored when receiving.
* Stream Identifier:  A stream identifier expressed as an unsigned 31-bit integer.  The value 0x0 is reserved for frames that are associated with the connection as a whole as opposed to an individual stream.
* Frame Payload: The structure and content of the frame payload is dependent entirely on the frame type.

### Frame Size
The size of a frame payload is limited by the maximum size that a
   receiver advertises in the SETTINGS_MAX_FRAME_SIZE setting.  This
   setting can have any value between 2^14 (16,384) and 2^24-1
   (16,777,215) octets, inclusive.
   
 The size of the frame header is not included when describing frame sizes.
   

### Header Compression and Decompression
